■ Implementing the New-Era Talent-for-a-Strong-Military Strategy, promoting the comprehensive transformation and upgrade of the capabilities, quality, structure, cultivation and management of military personnel, and forging highly cultivated and professionalized new-style military talent who possess both political integrity and ability, is of great significance for realizing the Party’s goal of strengthening China’s armed forces in the new era and comprehensively building its military into a world-class military. We need to implement the spirit of the Central Talent Work Conference, make a good job of putting into action [the spirit] of the Central Military Commission’s (CMC) conference on talent-related work, deeply implement the New-Era Talent-for-a-Strong-Military Strategy, and give better play to the supporting and leading role of talent in the cause of strengthening the armed forces.
■ The key to a stronger military is its people. Since the 18th National Party Congress, the CCP Central Committee and the CMC have given a prominent position to the New-Era Talent-for-a-Strong-Military Strategy within the development of the cause of strengthening the armed forces, and have made great efforts to reassert the political discipline of the Party exercising leadership over talent, to reinforce the combat-oriented nature of military training, to optimize the layout for the development of military personnel, to deepen the reform of human resource policies and systems, and to promote openness and integration in talent cultivation work. With this, China’s military has made historic achievements in its talent-related work.
■ Over the coming five years, the central task of China’s military construction is to realize the goal set for the centenary of the People’s Liberation Army. We must enhance alertness to potential dangers, the sense of responsibility, and an enterprising spirit, and comprehensively strengthen work related to China’s military talent.
■  We must understand the characteristics of military professions and the laws of the development of military personnel, increase the targeted nature and effectiveness of talent-related work, and ensure that the personnel we train fit the needs of the cause of building a strong military. We need to reach deep to address prominent issues and problems constraining China’s military talent work, and press ahead in a coordinated way with reform and innovation in identifying, pooling, cultivating and appointing talent. Making a good job of China’s military talent work cannot happen without strong support from the entire Party and all sectors throughout the country. We must strengthen communication and coordination between the military and localities, orient work toward meeting military demand, and coordinate local and military plans, policies and work, so as to deeply integrate China’s military talent work into the strategy for building China into a talent-strong country.
Xinhua News Agency, Beijing, July 29th. On the occasion of the celebration of the 95th anniversary of the founding of the Chinese People’s Liberation Army, on the afternoon of July 28th, the CCP Central Committee Politburo conducted the 41st collective study session on the in-depth implementation of the New-Era Talent-for-a-Strong-Military Strategy. Xi Jinping, General Secretary of the CCP Central Committee, delivered an important speech while presiding over the study session, and extended congratulations on the occasion on behalf of the CCP Central Committee and the Central Military Commission to all the officers and soldiers of the PLA and People’s Armed Police, military civilians, and reserve forces.
Xi Jinping stressed that implementing the New-Era Talent-for-a-Strong-Military Strategy, promoting the comprehensive transformation and upgrade of the capabilities, quality, structure, cultivation and management of military personnel, and forging highly cultivated and professionalized new-style military talent who possess both political integrity and ability, is of great significance for realizing the Party’s goal of strengthening China’s armed forces in the new era and comprehensively building its military into a world-class military. We need to implement the spirit of the Central Talent-Related Work Conference, make a good job of putting into action [the spirit] of the Central Military Commission’s conference on talent-related work, deeply implement the New-Era Talent-for-a-Strong-Military Strategy, and give better play to the supporting and leading role of talent in the cause of strengthening the armed forces.
Comrade Shen Zhihua, head of the Institute for Military Political Work under the Academy of Military Sciences, gave a talk on deeply implementing the New-Era Talent-for-a-Strong-Military Strategy and gave opinions and recommendations.
Xi Jinping, in his speech, stressed that the key to a stronger military is its people. Since the 18th National Party Congress, the CCP Central Committee and the CMC have given a prominent position to the New-Era Talent-for-a-Strong-Military Strategy within the development of the cause of strengthening the armed forces, and have made great efforts to reassert the political discipline of the Party exercising leadership over military personnel, to reinforce the combat-oriented nature of military training, to optimize the layout for the development of military personnel, to deepen reform of human resource policies and systems, and to promote openness and integration in talent cultivation work. With this, China’s military has made historic achievements in its talent-related work.
Xi Jinping pointed out that the world has entered a new period of turmoil and change, and the instability and uncertainty surrounding China’s national security situation has increased. Over the coming five years, the central task of China’s military construction is to realize the goal set for the centenary of the People’s Liberation Army. We must enhance alertness to potential dangers, the sense of responsibility, and an enterprising spirit, and comprehensively strengthen work related to China’s military talent.
Xi Jinping stressed that we must understand the characteristics of military professions and the laws of the development of military personnel, increase the targeted nature and effectiveness of talent-related work, and ensure that the personnel we train fit the needs of the cause of building a strong military. We must persist in applying a political perspective in cultivating, evaluating and deploying personnel, and put into effect the Party’s absolute leadership over the military in all aspects, and entire processes, of talent-related work, making sure that the barrel of the gun is always in the hands of people who are reliable and loyal to the Party. We must treat the starting point and ultimate goal of talent-related work as being to build armed forces that are able to fight and win, keep in close step with developments in the latest forms of warfare, and raise the capacity to supply, and the quality of, talent who are combat ready. We need to strengthen the study of modern science and technology, especially military-related high technology, increasing capacity to understand, innovate, and apply science and technology, upgrading all-round ability by improving scientific and technological competence.
Xi Jinping pointed out that we need to reach deep to address prominent issues and problems constraining China’s military talent work, and press ahead in a coordinated way with reform and innovation in identifying, pooling, cultivating and appointing talent. We should persevere with the approach of independently cultivating talent, expand the channels of talent cultivation and explore new talent cultivation models. We must implement the military education policy for the new era, putting into action the strategy to prioritize the development of universities and institutes of learning and deepening the reform of China’s military universities and institutes of learning. We must persist with cultivating and discovering talent during major missions and on the front lines. We need to make innovations in military human resource management, formulate systematic plans for career development for different types of personnel, apply targeted distribution and allocation of personnel, and promote routine and orderly exchanges. We must strengthen the notion of serving talent, adopting comprehensive measures to provide them with sound evaluation, positive incentives, and support, and so on. We must develop talent-related institutions and systems in which military professions enjoy comparative advantages, improve the development of supporting policies and systems, and ensure the smooth transfer between old and new policies and systems.
Xi Jinping emphasized that making a good job of China’s military talent work cannot happen without strong support from the entire Party and all sectors throughout the country. We must strengthen communication and coordination between the military and localities, orient work toward meeting military demand, and coordinate local and military plans, policies and work, so as to deeply integrate China’s military talent work into the strategy for building China into a talent-strong country. Central Party and state organs, and local Party committees and governments at all levels must have stronger awareness of national defense matters, remain concerned with military talent work, and offer support in terms of policy-making, resource-sharing, and so on; and must actively address concerns and difficulties of military personnel, such as employment for their spouses, school and childcare for their children, the implementation of preferential treatment policies, and support for veterans, making concerted efforts to make a better job of military talent work and contribute to promoting the cause of strengthening the armed forces.
