Liu Jieyi, director of the Taiwan Affairs Office of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China and the Taiwan Affairs Office of the State Council, delivered an online speech at the 2022 Cross-Strait Relations Seminar on August 17. He said that the general trend of history is moving forward, and the reunification of the motherland and national rejuvenation have entered an irreversible historical process. This will not be diverted by the will of some stubborn anti-China forces on the U.S. side, nor will it be swayed by the wishful thinking of the “Taiwan independence” separatist forces. When vice rises one foot, virtue rises ten. No matter how the “Taiwan independence” forces and external forces collude to cause trouble, it will not change the fact that Taiwan is an iron part of China, nor will it stop the historical trend of national reunification and national rejuvenation. It will only accelerate the thorough liquidation of the “Taiwan independence” separatist forces and the complete bankruptcy of external interfering forces. The more than 1.4 billion Chinese people are steadily advancing the process of national reunification with higher fighting spirit, stronger determination, and a firmer pace.
The following is the full text of the speech:
Dear Deputy Secretary Zhou Ji,
Distinguished guests and friends:
It is a great pleasure to attend the 2022 Cross-Strait Relations Seminar by video. On behalf of the Taiwan Affairs Office of the Central Committee of the Chinese Communist Party and the Taiwan Affairs Office of the State Council, I would like to extend my warm congratulations on the convening of the seminar and my sincere greetings to the experts, scholars, guests, and friends from both sides of the Taiwan Strait.
Not long ago, we held a symposium on the 30-year 1992 Consensus, took a series of actions to counter Pelosi’s visit to Taiwan and the “Taiwan independence” separatist activities on the island, released the white paper The Taiwan Question and China’s Reunification in the New Era, demonstrating continued strengthening of the general trend of opposing “independence” and promoting reunification, and firmly promote the confidence, determination, and strength of the reunification of the motherland. In the near future, we are primed to usher in the success of the 20th Party Congress. This grand meeting will surely promote the process of national reunification and national rejuvenation. In this context, the theme of this seminar is “grasping the general trend of history and seeking national rejuvenation,” which is of great practical significance.
Since the 18th Party Congress, socialism with Chinese characteristics has entered a new era. The Party Central Committee with Comrade Xi Jinping at its core will coordinate the overall strategy of the great rejuvenation of the Chinese nation and the great changes in the world unseen in a century, grasp the changing times of cross-Strait relations, enrich and develop the theory of national reunification and policies on Taiwan, and form a new era for the Party to solve the Taiwan issue. The overall strategy provides the fundamental follow-up and action guide for Taiwan work in the new era. We must grasp the general trend, focus on the overall situation, and stand on righteousness. We must firmly grasp our leadership and initiative in cross-Strait relations and continue to strengthen the timing and momentum of the reunification of the motherland. We must lead the development of cross-Strait relations in the right direction and push forward the reunification process of the motherland.
Over the past decade, we have persisted in forging ahead and promoting historic breakthroughs in cross-Strait political exchanges. We have established a regular communication mechanism between the competent authorities of cross-Strait affairs on both sides, have conducted mutual visits between the heads of the two authorities, and have established a hotline. By achieving the first meeting between leaders of the two sides since 1949, we have elevated cross-Strait political interaction to a new level, opened a new chapter in the development of cross-Strait relations, and established a new milestone in the process of national reunification.
Over the past decade, we have adhered to the one-China principle and the 1992 Consensus. On this basis, we have strengthened exchanges with relevant parties in Taiwan, have held in-depth dialogues and exchanges, and have gathered joint forces to oppose “Taiwan independence” and maintain the peaceful development of cross-Strait relations. Important steps have been taken to promote dialogue and consultation from all walks of life on both sides of the Strait to discuss cross-Strait relations and the future of the nation and unite compatriots on both sides of the Strait to jointly march towards the reunification of the motherland and the majestic force of national rejuvenation.
Over the past decade, we have adhered to a people-centered development philosophy, benefiting and serving Taiwan compatriots as the people of the mainland. We have taken the lead in sharing development opportunities on the mainland with Taiwan compatriots and have gradually implemented equal treatment. A series of policies and measures to benefit Taiwan and its people have been introduced to continue to deepen the integrated development of the two sides of the Strait, and we will continue to promote the spiritual integration of compatriots. As more Taiwan compatriots have integrated into the mainland of the motherland for development, we have witnessed more and more vivid practices of the cross-Strait community with a shared future.
Over the past decade, we have effectively responded to the complex and severe changes in the situation across the Strait, as well as risks and challenges. We have resolutely cracked down on “Taiwan independence” separatist activities and severely punished “Taiwan independence” diehards in accordance with the law. We have resolutely opposed the interference of external forces, effectively counteracting the “Taiwan card” played by external forces, and have continued to consolidate the pattern in which the international community adheres to the one-China principle. The struggle against separatism and interference has achieved new results, and the general trend of opposing “independence” and promoting reunification has been further strengthened.
Over the past decade, we have adhered to the principle of “People on Both Sides of the Taiwan Strait Are All of the Same Family, Realizing the Chinese Dream Together” and have broadly united Taiwan compatriots. We have continued to hold the Straits Forum, Cross-Strait Entrepreneurs Summit, Join Hands Forum, Cross-Strait Youth Development Forum, and other activities. We have inspired Taiwan compatriots to be participants, contributors, and beneficiaries of national rejuvenation, giving them the sense of pride, glory, and happiness of being properly Chinese, enhancing their understanding and recognition of the leadership of the CCP and the significant advantages of the socialist system.
The work with Taiwan over the past decade is an integral component of the 10-year great change of the new era, and it is carried out on the basis of the historic achievements and changes in the cause of the Party and the country. I would like to say once again that the key factor that determines the direction of cross-Strait relations is the development and progress of the motherland.
Distinguished guests and friends, realizing the great rejuvenation of the Chinese nation is the greatest dream of the Chinese nation since modern times. To achieve this, the CCP has united and led the sons and daughters of the Chinese people to make a long-term and unremitting struggle. The Chinese nation has ushered in a great leap from standing up and becoming rich to becoming strong, entering an irreversible historical process in the great rejuvenation of the Chinese nation. Our foundation for reunification grows ever stronger, our conditions are becoming more and more sufficient, our capabilities are growing stronger, and we are more confident, more capable, and closer to realizing the complete reunification of the motherland than ever before. The Taiwan issue arose out of national weakness and chaos and will surely be resolved with the rejuvenation of the nation. The historical trend of complete reunification of the motherland is unstoppable and irrepressible. This is where our stamina and focus lie, as well as our confidence and determination.
In the face of the historical trend of national rejuvenation and reunification of the motherland, the majority of compatriots in Taiwan should seriously think about how to conform to the historical trend and join the historical process as well as how to prevent a very small number of people from standing against the historical trend and hindering the historical process. As for which path will be followed, that depends on the future of Taiwan and depends on the interests and well-being of Taiwan compatriots and the development of cross-Strait relations.
We are pleased to see that more and more Taiwan compatriots, especially Taiwanese youth, have come to realize that the future of Taiwan lies in the reunification of the motherland and the well-being of Taiwan compatriots lies in the rejuvenation of the nation. More and more have firmly issued the declaration that “I am a part of rejuvenation, and I am a part of reunification.” They have taken the promotion of the complete reunification of the motherland and the common rejuvenation of the nation as a supremely glorious cause. They consciously participate in the great process of national rejuvenation and the reunification of the motherland.
The white paper released a week ago thoroughly implements the CCP’s overall strategy for solving the Taiwan issue in the new era, comprehensively summarizes the struggle, major achievements, and valuable experience of the CCP in unswervingly advancing the complete reunification of the motherland, and profoundly exposes and criticizes the acts and fallacies of “Taiwan independence” separatism and interference by external forces. The white paper systematically clarifies the major policies and policy propositions for promoting the reunification of the motherland in the new era and for the new journey, clearly shows the historical trend of the reunification of the motherland, and fully indicates the bright future of peaceful reunification. We hope that the vast number of Taiwan compatriots will follow the general trend of history, see clearly where their future interests lie, stand on the right side of history, and work together for national rejuvenation and reunification of the motherland to create a bright future that belongs to them and the Chinese nation.
In the face of the general trend of history, there will always be certain countercurrents, turning back waves, and moving against the historical trend. Since the DPP authorities came to power, they have stubbornly adhered to the “Taiwan independence” separatist stance, refused to recognize the one-China principle and the 1992 Consensus, created cross-Strait confrontation, and attempted to “rely on the United States to seek independence” and “reject reunification by force” in an attempt to resist the motherland. They wantonly destroy the prospect of peaceful reunification and have squeezed the space for peaceful reunification. They betrayed national interests, colluded with external forces, acted as pawns, and have attempted to interfere with the historical process of national rejuvenation. The very small number of “Taiwan independence” separatist forces are obstacles that must be removed on the road to the reunification of the motherland. They are hidden dangers that must be eliminated in the process of national rejuvenation. We are willing to strive for the prospect of peaceful reunification with the greatest sincerity and utmost of efforts, but if “Taiwan independence” separatist forces continue to provoke and persecute us or even break through the red line, we will have to take decisive measures. We hope that the majority of Taiwan compatriots will act with justice and come forward to jointly eradicate the root cause of “Taiwan independence,” resolutely defeat the “Taiwan independence” attempt, and contribute wisdom and strength to the nation’s righteousness, vital interests, and bright future.
Some forces in the United States have stepped up their efforts to “contain China with Taiwan” in an attempt to use the “Taiwan card” to obstruct the process of China’s reunification and national rejuvenation. They have gone further and further down the wrong path, constantly hollowing out the one-China principle, elevating the level of official exchanges between the United States and Taiwan, increasing the military ties between the United States and Taiwan, constantly selling weapons to Taiwan, instigating “independence” provocations, and ganging up to interfere in China’s internal affairs in an attempt to promote the “internationalization of the Taiwan issue.” Half a month ago, Nancy Pelosi openly visited Taiwan and made unreasonable provocations against the more than 1.4 billion Chinese people. She was strongly opposed and countered by the Chinese government and its people. China’s solemn position has been unanimously supported by the majority of countries upholding justice in the international community. Whether external forces play the “Taiwan card” or “Taiwan independence” forces rely on external forces to seek “independence,” they can only end in failure.
This year marks the 50th anniversary of the publication of the China-U.S. Shanghai Communiqué, and today marks the 40th anniversary of the publication of the China-U.S. August 17 Communiqué. Decades have passed, and the United States has not only failed to keep its political commitment to the Chinese government on the Taiwan issue but has reversed the course of history. The actions of the United States will only make it clear to the world that some forces in the United States are attempting to undermine China’s peaceful reunification process and the peace and stability of the Taiwan Strait. The “Taiwan independence” separatist forces on the island colluding with external forces will inevitably push Taiwan into a dangerous situation and cause great harm to the Taiwan compatriots.
History is moving forward with great momentum, and the reunification of the motherland and national rejuvenation has entered an irreversible historical process. This will not be diverted by the will of some stubborn anti-China forces on the U.S. side, nor will it be swayed by the wishful thinking of the “Taiwan independence” separatist forces. When vice rises one foot, virtue rises ten. No matter how the “Taiwan Independence” forces and external forces collude to cause trouble, it will not change the fact that Taiwan is an iron part of China, nor will it stop the historical trend of national reunification and national rejuvenation. It will only accelerate the thorough liquidation of the “Taiwan independence” separatist forces and the complete bankruptcy of external interfering forces. More than 1.4 billion Chinese people are steadily advancing the process of national reunification with higher fighting spirit, stronger determination, and a firmer pace.
Distinguished guests and friends, the Cross-Strait Relations Seminar organized by the Research Center for Cross-Strait Relations is an important platform for compatriots on both sides of the strait to exchange ideas and build consensus, as well as an important platform for conveying the voice of the times and expressing the aspirations of compatriots. As a member of the Chinese nation, looking forward to the bright future of the great rejuvenation of the Chinese nation, I hope that everyone will uphold the righteousness of the nation. I hope that we can guide Taiwan compatriots to see the general trend of history clearly, understand that reunification is beneficial, that “Taiwan independence” is a dead end, and that outsiders are unreliable so as to jointly create a bright future for national rejuvenation and the reunification of the motherland.
Henan is an important province with a large population, a large economy, and a grand culture in the central region, with unique geographical advantages. Henan and Taiwan are closely related by blood and have a deep relationship. They are the ancestral place of the hearts of Taiwan compatriots. Many Taiwan compatriots call themselves “people of the Central Plains” and speak “Central Plains dialect.” With the high attention and strong support of the Henan Provincial Party Committee and the Provincial Government, the exchanges and cooperation between Henan and Taiwan have continued to deepen, personnel exchanges have become increasingly close, economic ties have become increasingly close, and more and more Taiwan compatriots have come to Henan to develop their careers and realize their life goals. The Taiwan Affairs Office of the Central Committee and the Taiwan Affairs Office of the State Council will continue to support Henan Province’s work with Taiwan, assist Henan’s development, and promote cooperation between Henan and Taiwan.
I wish the seminar a complete success. I wish you all good health, success in your careers, and all the best!
Thank you!
