Xinhua News Agency, Beijing May 27 — CCP Central Committee Politburo convened a meeting on May 27 to review the CCP Political Consultation Work Regulations. Xi Jinping, General Secretary of the CCP Central Committee, chaired the meeting.
The meeting pointed out that political consultation is an important component of the system of CCP-led multiparty cooperation and political consultation, an important form of socialist consultative democracy, and an important means of pooling wisdom, advancing consensus, and promoting scientific, democratic decision-making. The formulation of the CCP Political Consultation Work Regulations is a matter of great significance for strengthening Party leadership over political consultation work, for making political consultation work more scientific, institutionalized, and standardized, for upholding and improving China’s new-style political party system, and for consolidating and developing the patriotic united front.
The meeting emphasized that to carry out political consultation work properly it is necessary, using Xi Jinping Thought on Socialism with Chinese Characteristics for a New Era as the guide, to implement General Secretary Xi Jinping’s important thought on strengthening and improving united front work and his important thought on strengthening and improving people’s political consultative conference work, and to boost the “Four Consciousnesses,” reinforce the “Four Matters of Confidence,” and fulfil the “Two Upholds.” It is necessary to uphold and strengthen the Party’s comprehensive leadership, using the institutional systems and work mechanisms of CCP-led political consultation work to ensure the correct political direction of political consultation and enhance the efficacy of political consultation. We should persevere in concentrating on the central task and serving the overall situation, focusing on forging consensus, using political consultation to seek common ground and set aside differences, unifying understanding on fundamental and major issues, uniting all forces tightly around the Party, and driving forward the formation of a powerful synergy for building China into a modernized socialist country in an all-around way and realizing the great rejuvenation of the Chinese nation. Party committees (Party groups) should strengthen organizational leadership over implementation of the Regulations. They should firmly grasp implementation and put the Party Central Committee’s lines, policies, decisions, and arrangements regarding political consultation work into practice.
The meeting also studied other items.
