Xi Jinping delivered an important speech at the opening ceremony of the special seminar for key provincial and ministerial-level leaders on insisting on bottom-line thinking and focusing on preventing and resolving major risks, which emphasized: 
Improving prevention and control capabilities and focusing on preventing and resolving major risks; 
Maintaining sustainable and healthy economic development and overall social stability;
This seminar was presided over by Li Keqiang and attended by Li Zhanshu, Wang Yang, Wang Huning, Zhao Leji, and Han Zheng 
Xinhua News Agency, Beijing, January 21: Xi Jinping delivered an important speech at the opening ceremony of the special seminar for key provincial and ministerial-level leaders on insisting on bottom-line thinking and focusing on preventing and resolving major risks, which opened at the Central Party School on the morning of the 21st. Xi Jinping, General Secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China, President of the State, and Chairman of the Central Military Commission, delivered an important speech at the opening ceremony that emphasized: We must uphold the guidance of the ideology of socialism with Chinese characteristics for the new era, fully implement the spirit of the 19th Party Congress and the 2nd and 3rd Plenums of the 19th Central Committee, deeply understand and accurately grasp the profound changes in the external environment and the new situations, new problems, and new challenges facing China’s reform, development, and stability, adhere to bottom-line thinking, enhance awareness of danger, improve prevention and control capabilities, focus on preventing and resolving major risks, and maintain sustainable and healthy economic development and overall social stability. This will provide a strong guarantee for decisive victory in establishing a well-off society in an all-round way, the great victory of socialism with Chinese characteristics in the new era, and the realization of the Chinese dream of the great rejuvenation of the Chinese nation. 
Li Keqiang, a member of the Politburo Standing Committee, presided over the opening ceremony, with other Politburo Standing Committee members Li Zhanshu, Wang Yang, Wang Huning, Zhao Leji, and Han Zheng in attendance. 
Xi Jinping pointed out that the current situation in China is generally good. The leadership of the Party Central Committee is strong. The “Four Consciousnesses,” “Four Matters of Confidence,” and “Two Upholds” have been significantly enhanced for the whole Party. The situation in the ideological field is positive and healthy. The economy is maintaining a trend of seeking progress while maintaining stability, the people of all ethnic groups across the country are united and have high morale, and the overall social situation remains stable. 
In his speech, Xi Jinping gave an in-depth analysis and put forward clear requirements on preventing and resolving major risks in the fields of politics, ideology, economy, science and technology (S&T), society, external environment, and party building. He emphasized, that, in the face of the tumultuous international situation, the complex and sensitive environment around us, and the arduous task of reform, development, and stability, we must always maintain a high degree of vigilance and both be on high alert against “black swan” events and prevent “gray rhino” events. We must not only move quickly to prevent risks, but also ingeniously deal with and resolve risks. It is necessary not only to wage a preventative war to prevent and resist risks effectively, but also take the strategic initiative to turn danger into ease and crisis into opportunity. 
Xi Jinping pointed out that Party committees and governments at all levels must resolutely implement the overall national security outlook, implement the requirements of the Party Central Committee concerning the maintenance of political security, and ensure China’s political security. We must continue to consolidate and strengthen mainstream public opinion, increase the intensity of public opinion guidance, accelerate the establishment of a comprehensive system of network governance, and promote the governance of the Internet according to law. We must attach great importance to ideological and political work for the younger generation, improve the system of ideological and political work, continuously innovate in the content and form of ideological and political work, use education to guide young people to form a correct world outlook, outlook on life, and values, enhance confidence in the path, theory, system, and culture of socialism with Chinese characteristics in order to ensure that the younger generation become socialist builders and successors. 
Xi Jinping pointed out that the current economic situation in China is generally good, but the international environment and domestic conditions facing economic development are undergoing profound and complex changes. In the process of advancing supply-side structural reforms, some difficulties and challenges will inevitably be encountered. The economic operation is stable but there are changes, and in change there are worries. We must maintain strategic determination and advance the economic development of China in the right direction. We must also increase our awareness of danger, take precautions, conduct precise research and make accurate judgments, and properly respond to major risks that may arise in the economic field. All regions and departments must balance the relationship between stable growth and risk prevention and properly grasp the rhythm and intensity. We must steadily implement long-term mechanisms and solutions for the stable and healthy development of the real estate market. We must strengthen psychological analysis of the market, do a good job in evaluating the impact of policies on the financial market, and be adept at guiding expectations. We must strengthen market monitoring, strengthen supervision and coordination, and promptly eliminate hidden dangers. We must effectively solve the problem of financing difficulties for small, medium, and micro enterprises, strengthen assistance to enterprises to stabilize employment, and promptly implement policies that prioritize employment. We must intensify efforts to properly handle the starting, implementation, and staffing difficulties involved in the disposal of “zombie enterprises”, accelerate the promotion of market clearout, and release the large amount of accumulated resources. All regions and departments must adopt effective measures, do a good job in stabilizing employment, stabilizing finance, stabilizing foreign trade, stabilizing foreign investment, stabilizing investment, and stabilizing expectations, and maintain economic operations within a reasonable range. 
Xi Jinping emphasized that security in the field of S&T is an important component of national security. We must strengthen system building and capacity building, improve the national innovation system, solve prominent problems such as duplicate resource allocation, scattered scientific research forces, and unclear positioning of main innovation entity functions, and improve the overall effectiveness of the innovation system. We must accelerate compensation for shortcomings and establish the advantages of independent innovation institutions and mechanisms. We must strengthen strategic research and judgment and forward-looking deployments in major innovation fields, firmly grasp the layout of national laboratories, reorganize the system of state key Laboratories, build major innovation bases and innovation platforms, and improve the mechanisms for industry, academia, and research coordination and innovation. We must strengthen the overall planning and organization for major S&T tasks related to national security and economic and social development and strengthen the construction of national strategic S&T forces. We must accelerate the construction of an S&T security early warning and monitoring system, focus on areas such as artificial intelligence, gene editing, medical diagnostics, autonomous driving, unmanned aerial vehicles, and service robots, and accelerate the promotion of relevant legislative work. 
Xi Jinping pointed out that to maintain the overall stability of the society, we must effectively implement various measures to ensure security and stability, make great efforts to solve problems of vital interest to the people, comprehensively do a good job in all aspects of employment, education, social security, medicine and health, food safety, safe production, public security, and housing market regulation, and continuously increase the people’s sense of gain, sense of happiness, and sense of security. We must insist on both protecting legitimate rights and interests and fighting against illegal crimes in a hard and fast manner. For groups affected by economic cases involving the masses, we must persist in coordinating preventing and fighting crime with resolving risks and maintaining stability and doing a good job in controlling stolen goods and controlling people, returning assets, and educational guidance. We must continue to advance the special struggle against organized crime (扫黑除恶, lit. elimination of crime and vice), keep a close eye on major crimes involving organized crime, the economic foundation of organized crime, and the “relationship networks” and “protective umbrella” behind criminal organizations and work hard to fight and prevent both the symptoms and the root causes. We must innovate and improve a three-dimensional, informatized public security prevention and control system, maintain high pressure as a deterrent against crime, and enhance the people’s sense of security. We must promote the modernization of social governance, adhere to and develop the  “Fengqiao experience” (枫桥经验,  mobilizing the masses at the grassroots of society to enforce proper conduct), improve social coordination mechanisms for security construction, and improve the capacity and level of maintaining social stability at the source. 
Xi Jinping emphasized that, currently, unprecedented world changes are accelerating and profoundly evolving, the sources of global turbulence and risk points are increasing, and China’s external environment is complex and harsh. We must coordinate the domestic and international situations and the two main issues of development and security, focus on the key points while taking the overall situation into account, and effectively preventing various kinds of risks linkages. We must strengthen the protection of overseas interests and ensure the security of major overseas projects, personnel, and institutions. We must improve the co-construction of the “Belt and Road” security assurance system, resolutely safeguard sovereignty, security, and development interests, and create a good external environment for China’s reform, development, and stability. 
Xi Jinping pointed out that since the 18th Party Congress, we have promoted the comprehensive and strict governance of the Party with the spirit of self-revolution and eliminated serious hidden dangers in the Party. The results have been remarkable, but this does not mean that we can rest on our laurels. The test of long-term governance, the test of reform and opening up, the test of the market economy, and the test of the external environment faced by the Party are long-term and complex in nature. The danger of spiritual laxity, the danger of insufficient capacity, the danger of separation from the masses, and the danger of passive corruption faced by the Party are sharp and severe. This is a major judgment based on the actual situation. The whole party must strengthen the “Four Consciousnesses”, uphold the “Four Matters of Confidence”, and practice the “Two Upholds.” We must consciously maintain a high degree of consistency with the Party Central Committee in ideological and political actions, consciously safeguard the solidarity and unity of the Party, strictly abide by the Party’s political discipline and political rules, and always maintain ties of flesh and blood to the people. The Chinese nation is at a critical juncture in its great rejuvenation, and our reform and development are at an important stage where difficulties must be overcome and barriers broken down. We urgently need cadres who are determined to forge ahead, work hard, and take action at critical moments. Since the 18th Party Congress, we have won an overwhelming victory in the struggle against corruption struggle, but our victory in this struggle is not yet complete. The situation of the struggle against corruption remains severe and complex. Our determination of zero tolerance cannot be shaken, and the intensity of the fight against corruption cannot be relaxed. We must resolutely fight a tough and protracted battle against corruption with constant tenacity and perseverance. 
Xi Jinping emphasized that preventing and resolving major risks is the political responsibility of Party committees, governments, and leading cadres at all levels. Everyone must uphold the responsibility of defending their turf and fulfilling their responsibilities and do a practical, careful, and good job in preventing and resolving major risks. We must strengthen risk awareness, always observe the general trend and reflect on the overall situation, scientifically predict the development trend of the situation and risks and challenges hidden in it, and take precautions. We must improve risk resolution capabilities, grasp the essence through complex phenomena, grasp the key points, pinpoint the causes, make decisive decisions, be adept at guiding the masses and organizing the masses, and be adept at integrating the forces of all parties and scientifically arranging troops to effectively deal with risks. Leading cadres must strengthen their theoretical cultivation, make an in-depth study of the basic theories of Marxism, learn, understand, apply, and practice the ideology of socialism with Chinese characteristics for the new era, master the worldview and methodology of dialectical materialism that permeates this ideology, improve their capabilities of strategic thinking, historical thinking, dialectical thinking, innovative thinking, rule of law thinking, and bottom-line thinking, be adept at grasping the laws from within the complicated contradictions, and continue to accumulate experience and increase their talents. We must improve the risk prevention and control mechanisms, establish sound risk research and judgment mechanisms, decision-making risk assessment mechanisms, risk prevention and control coordination mechanisms, and risk prevention and control responsibility mechanisms, actively strengthen coordination and cooperation, and adhere to the implementation by each level. 
Xi Jinping emphasized that, to prevent and resolve major risks, we need an energetic and tenacious fighting spirit. Leading cadres must dare to take responsibility and dare to fight, maintain a fighting spirit, and enhance their fighting skills. Young cadres must engage in great struggles, fighting with real swords and guns. Leading groups and leading cadres at all levels must strengthen their experience of struggle, strengthen their fighting skills, and keep their fighting spirit forever. With a tenacious will to “flatten out the bumps to forge a path, and set off again after overcoming hard fights and dangers,” they should respond to every major risk and challenge and earnestly do a good job in reform, development, and stability work. 
While presiding over the opening ceremony, Li Keqiang said that General Secretary Xi Jinping’s important speech analyzed the current and future security situation facing China from a strategic and overall perspective, and clarified the need to work hard to prevent and resolve major risks. It put forward clear requirements for Party committees, governments, and leading cadres at all levels to take on the political responsibility of preventing and resolving major risks and was highly ideological, targeted, and instructive. We must earnestly and thoroughly study the spirit of General Secretary Xi Jinping’s important speech, keep in close contact with the profound changes in the external environment and the new situations, new problems, and new challenges faced by China in reform, development, and stability, improve our political standing, strengthen our political awareness, fully understand the importance and urgency of preventing and resolving major risks, strengthen our confidence, dare to take responsibility, take on responsibilities, and effectively do a good job in preventing and resolving major risks. 
Members of the Politburo of the CCP Central Committee, members of the Secretariat of the Central Committee, members and the vice-chairman of the Standing Committee of the National People’s Congress, State Councilors, the president of the Supreme People’s Court, the procurator-general of the Supreme People’s Procuratorate, the vice-chairman of the National Committee of the Chinese People’s Political Consultative Conference, and members of the Central Military Commission attended the seminar. 
The main comrades responsible for various provinces, autonomous regions, and municipalities, the Xinjiang Production and Construction Corps, and central and state agencies and departments along with major military units and the agencies and departments of the Central Military Commission participated in the seminar. Responsible comrades from the central committees of the democratic parties, the All-China Federation of Industry and Commerce, and relevant sectors attended the opening ceremony. 
